---
layout: post
title: Introducing Dantzig&#58; A Rust-powered linear programming library for Python
categories: [python, rust, optimization]
---

There's no denying the growing movement within the Python community to prefer Rust over C for writing performance-sensitive extension modules. Leading the way there's [`polars`](https://github.com/pola-rs/polars), a fast multi-threaded DataFrame library I've discussed in an earlier post, [`ruff`](https://github.com/charliermarsh/ruff) which runs about 100x faster than the predominant (and painfully sluggish) `flake8` linter, and even [`pydantic`](https://github.com/pydantic/pydantic) is preparing a 2.0 release with a `pydantic-core` backend written entirely in Rust.  To add to this already-impressive corpus of projects, I am proud to annouce the release of [`dantzig`](https://github.com/matteosantama/dantzig), a Rust-powered linear programming library for Python! 

## Linear Programming

If you unfamilar with linear programming, allow me to share a quick example to demonstrate the power of linear programming. Suppose you are the manager of a retail store and over the next three time periods you need to order inventory from your supplier to satisfy demand. 

- Apriori, you know how much demand there will be each time period (an unrealistic assumption to be sure, but our model can be extended to accommodate uncertain demand) denoted by $$d_t$$ for $$t \in \{1, 2, 3\}$$. 
- The supplier charges a different per-unit price $$p_t$$ in each time period
- You face inventory holding costs $$h_t$$ for any inventory carried over from period $$t$$ to period $$t + 1$$.
- In each time period, you decide how much inventory to order, given by $$x_t$$, and then sell to your customers.

Naturally, you seek a policy that minimizes total cost. This problem can be formulated as a linear program:

$$
\begin{align*}
\min_x \quad & \sum_{t = 1}^3 p_t x_t + \sum_{t = 1}^3 h_t z_t \\
\text{s.t.} \quad & x_1 \geq d_1 \\
& x_2 + z_1 \geq d_2 \\
& x_3 + z_2 \geq d_3 \\
& z_1 = x_1 - d_1 \\
& z_2 = x_2 + z_1 - d_2 \\
& z_3 = x_3 + z_2 - d_3 \\
& x_t \geq 0 \\
& z_t \geq 0
\end{align*}
$$

where $$z_t$$ is an auxiliary variable that represents the amount of inventory you carry from period $$t$$ to period $$t + 1$$. Notice that the constraints require that demand is fully satisfied, and we never have negative orders or inventory.

## Solving with Dantzig

This problem is easily solved with `dantzig`.

```python
import dantzig as dz

p = [0.5, 3.5, 5.0]
h = [1.0, 5.5, 1.5]
d = [50, 75, 100]

d_1, d_2, d_3 = d

x_1 = dz.Variable.nonneg()
x_2 = dz.Variable.nonneg()
x_3 = dz.Variable.nonneg()
x = [x_1, x_2, x_3]

z_1 = dz.Var.nn()  # A succinct alias for `dz.Variable.nonneg()`
z_2 = dz.Var.nn()
z_3 = dz.Var.nn()
z = [z_1, z_2, z_3]

purchase_cost = sum(p_t * x_t for p_t, x_t in zip(p, x))
inventory_holding_cost = sum(h_t * z_t for h_t, z_t in zip(h, z))
total_cost = purchase_cost + inventory_holding_cost

problem = dz.Minimize(total_cost).subject_to(
    [
        x_1 >= d_1,
        x_2 + z_1 >= d_2,
        x_3 + z_2 >= d_3,
        z_1 == x_1 - d_1,
        z_2 == x_2 + z_1 - d_2,
        z_3 == x_3 + z_2 - d_3,
    ]
)
soln = problem.solve()

assert soln.objective_value == 637.5
assert soln[x_1] == 125.0
assert soln[x_2] == 0.0
assert soln[x_3] == 100.0
```

It turns out the optimal solution is to only order in periods one and three!

## Dantzig Features

The Dantzig API is designed to be both expressive and terse, saving you keystrokes without sacrificing clarity. Beyond that, Dantzig supports

- Both minimization and maximization problems
- Arbitrarily restricted variables, including completely unrestricted free variables
- `==`, `<=`, and `>=` constraints
- SIMD-accelerated linear algebra operations
- Modern Python type-checking

Dantzig is still beta software. If you identify a problem, please open a bug report. As they say, a bug found is a bug fixed!